Daniel Holmgren: Hey, everybody.
My name is Daniel Holmgren.
I'm the head of protocol at Blue Sky.
Just a heads up, I've been losing my voice all week.
I thought maybe if I drank six Modellos at the
after party last night, that would loosen it up.
And the jury's out on if that's working or not.
So I'm hoping that I'm good for this talk.
To tell you a little bit about, so I lead protocol development
and design at Blue Sky.
To tell you a little bit about our team, right now it
's technically just me and Brian Newbold on it, although we
collaborate closely with other folks from the Atmosphere team.
Without going into our whole org structure, the reason that we split
out this protocol department is that protocol design and governance just looks
pretty different from running a startup.
You want to make slower intentional decisions and you don't want
it to get caught up in sort of the market and the
product life cycle of the startup.
So we put up a little bit of a internal firewall for
that department so we can go a little bit slower and we
can be focused on what we really care about with the protocol,
which is the emergence of a functioning, resilient, multi-stakeholder
atmosphere.
So I want to start with the provocation, which is that
it's logically impossible for Blue Sky to decentralize the network.
We really want the network to be decentralized.
It is impossible for us to do it because we are the
party, right?
And even if we funded somebody else to do it, they're
still downstream of us and it's not actually, do they actually
have the authority?
Do they actually have the power?
We're the central entity.
We can't decentralize it.
We can provide the tools and structures by which to decentralize
it, but we need others to use those tools and structures to
take control, power, and authority in the network to actually make this
a resilient multi-stakeholder network.
So that's what I'm going to be talking about today
is those tools and structures and how we address that.
The agenda is pretty brief.
We're going to talk about the IETF, some recent
developments with PLC governance, and then hard decentralization, which is
kind of getting into the actual threats of what having a big
entity in the middle of the ecosystem could do.
Before we do that, I'm on the big stage and I
wanted to talk about the real governance question, which is how do
we capitalize and stylize AT protocol?
Again, this is a multi-stakeholder network, so this is
just my opinion.
It just happens to be the correct opinion.
You can see AT protocol, at proto, all lowercase, not a
capital A, and atmosphere.
The rest of these are out, especially capital A, capital T, capital
P, proto.
That one is terrible, and it needs to be killed.
Okay, now onto the real stuff.
Talking about the IETF, or who gets to decide what
the protocol actually is.
So, what is the IETF?
It's the Internet Engineering Task Force.
It's the standards body for the Internet.
It standardized all the protocols that you know and love.
I'm sure that you're familiar with a lot of these.
SMTP for email, HTTP for the web, TLS, it gives
you the little green lock that tells you that your website's
secure, web sockets, OAuth, and more.
To tell you a little bit
about the vibe of the IETF, it's a pretty
weird, idiosyncratic organization.
I have a quote here from Snarf that I think captures
it pretty well.
He said, standards bodies or bureaucracy for good, which I think sums
it up.
It's pretty bureaucratic, it's pretty pedantic, but it
's ultimately a very idealistic organization.
And it's a very neutral, credible body, and they do a
very good job sort of stewarding and owning these sorts
of Internet protocols.
So, it's a mix of institutional, but it's also
grassroots.
You kind of have like a lot of old Internet heads there,
you have activists, you have academics and researchers, you also have folks
from the big tech companies that are Google and Cloudflare
and others.
And that also gives it this mix of idealism and prag
matism.
People have conversations about keeping the Internet decentralized, but also they care
a lot about the Internet working well.
And so they have this very pragmatic approach.
The kind of motto there is that decisions are made by rough
consensus and working code, which I think actually gives a good sense
of that idealism and pragmatism.
They want to see something working and they want to get a
bunch of diverse voices in the room and have general agreement on
it.
It's open membership.
Anybody can join.
You don't need to pay money to join.
You can just hop in the mailing list, start participating.
You can show up to meetings and start participating.
And companies are not members of it.
Individuals are members.
And I put kind of here because most people have an affili
ation with a company and it's like they kind of where
it's pretty clear that they are affiliated with companies.
But it is still it kind of gets at their ethos
in a way, which is that these are these are engineers coming
together trying to reach consensus on protocols.
So the exciting news is we have a working group at the
IETF.
Also huge kudos to Brian on that.
Brian really let up the standards work.
In all honesty, he should be the one up here presenting all
of this.
He's just done an incredible job at that.
The working group is called Authenticated Transfer or ATP.
This is the URL for it.
The responsible area director is Andy Newton.
The working group chairs are Shu Ping Peng and Mallory N
odell.
Brian and I got the chance to chat with all three of
these folks earlier this week.
Generally got very good vibes from them.
They're ready to hit the ground running.
They're kind of like start engaging on the mailing list, draft
up some stuff.
We want to have a lot of energy at the first meeting.
So the vibes were good.
I'm excited about this.
This is our charter in very small font.
You can read the entire thing on the IETF data
tracker.
This was on the note of bureaucracy for good.
This was four months of going back and forth on a mailing
list to get that nailed down to decide what we were going
to work on.
And to break down kind of what's in that, what the
charter for this working group is for is the structure of the
repo and how we encode records in it, the sync protocol
for public repositories, the AT URI scheme for addressing records
in those repositories, and then interface requirements and selection criteria for
an identifier resolution system.
This was kind of the hardest part of nailing down the
charter, which is that we did not want to pull dids
into the IETF.
We did not want to wade into the quagm
ire of specifying identity.
So we kind of, there's an identity-shaped hole in the
spec, and we're specifying the shape of that hole.
We are not going to be, this working group is not going
to be doing lexicon, any microblogging, or social
semantics at all.
Identity, as I mentioned, labeling, and the permission data work that
we're working on right now is outside of the working group
as well.
Though, parts of this may, we may recharter the work,
if everything goes well for both parties, we may recharter
the working group in the future and address some of these.
So, just to call it out, this is your chance to contribute
to the technical direction of the protocol.
As I said, this is open membership, anybody can hop in here.
If you think that we screwed it up and the protocol is
stupid or ugly or whatever, this is your chance to say it
and actually have an impact on the protocol.
You, in some very real sense, you are on an equal playing
field as Brian or I on that mailing list and in that
room.
So, just to give you a sense for participation, as I said,
anyone can participate.
There's three in-person meetings a year, one in North America,
one in Europe, and one in Asia generally.
They have a very good remote-first experience, and usually if you
're attending remote and only for one day, they'll give you
a free ticket.
So, that is great.
The first working group meeting will probably be at IETF
126 in Vienna, which is this summer, July.
We may do a remote interim meeting beforehand, and I will keep
people updated on that.
But regardless, follow along on the mailing list.
It's atp@ietf.
org.
Brian and I are going to be trying to send out some
stuff on there somewhat soon.
So, hop in and let us know your thoughts.
Okay, on to the next one.
PLC, or what about that centralized server at the bottom of
the stack?
For those that don't know, PLC is the identifier, not
identity, the identifier system for the AT protocol.
It's where your keys are stored, or yeah, it describes your
public keys and your service endpoints.
And it's kind of the centralized server run by Blue Sky
right now at the bottom of the stack.
My odd take is PLC isn't that bad.
The threat model is actually pretty limited.
Everything is cryptographically signed.
The threat model of whoever is running the PLC directory, what
they can get away with, is not that much.
They can't arbitrarily change your identity or anything like that.
They can essentially do denial of service attacks, removing operations from your
identity, or refusing to serve your identity.
Those aren't good, but just to note the threat model is
pretty limited.
All that being said, it still needs some work.
And so we're sort of thinking about maturing governance of
PLC as we go along.
We'd like to use DNS and ICANN as an
example, mostly for an analogy of iterative maturation of governance.
DNS has issues, ICANN has issues, don't overthink
the analogy, but you can kind of see how DNS evolved over
time.
It started as a text file that got distributed to different hosts
in the network, moved to a single server that was a computer
under the desk, transitioned to multiple root servers.
ICANN got set up as a governance body for it,
and ICANN continues to evolve in their governance, being more
and more multi-stakeholder, taking into account other countries outside
of the U.
S.
more.
And so this is sort of the model that we look at
with PLC is, you know, like we don't have to
get it to the end state of like, this is the perfect
PLC forever or something tomorrow.
It's how can we iteratively move that forward as the
like kind of threat model for the atmosphere evolves.
So the exciting news to announce is that public ledger of
credentials organization has officially been founded as a Swiss association.
Again,
huge kudos to Brian for leading this up as well as
Matt, our head of legal, which if you guys can find, I
don't know if Matt's here, but if you guys can
find Matt, you should talk to Matt.
He's like protocol-pilled now, it's very fun.
So we put a lot of thought into who is going to
be on the board for PLC.
Like we wanted a board that people in the ecosystem could really
trust to run this thing, and I think that we found the
perfect one, which is, it's just going to be Rosco
e.
I think Roscoe is just going to run this.
No, I'm kidding about that.
This is going to be the actual board for the PLC
association.
There's five members.
Brian, who is on the Blue Sky team.
He's a protocol engineer on the Blue Sky team.
He's the best person from the PLC or from the
Blue Sky team for this.
Richard Barnes, he's the co-founder of Let's Encry
pt, which has some analogies to PLC.
It looks pretty similar to PLC.
He's also the co-author of the MLS, Acme,
HPKE, all of these deep crypto IETF specifications.
Wendy Seltzer, who's an internet lawyer and open standards
advocate.
She's here at the conference.
You should find her and talk to her if you're interested.
Filippo Valsorda, who's a cryptographer.
He maintains the Go Cryptography Library, and he's also a
transparency log aficionado and is working on the Project
Sunlight implementation.
He is also here at the conference.
You should come talk to him.
And then Tyla, and I don't know how to pronounce
her last name, unfortunately, but she's a cryptographer and a
security and privacy engineer at Google.
She also lives in Switzerland, which is quite nice for organizational reasons.
Yeah, so just to note again, this is like the first step
in the evolution of PLC.
This isn't the end state of it.
We're going to continue working on this.
We also haven't actually transferred any assets over to PLC.
That is something that we'll be doing in the coming months,
and we'll give updates as that happens.
The first order of business is getting the domain name over to
PLC.
Alongside these organizational improvements, we also have some technical improvements to
We ship streaming replication and a replica reference implementation that provides full
verification of all directory operations.
There's a number of people that are running this in the
network already.
And the longer-term plan is a sophistication of that, which
is transparency logs.
And you know that we're going to do that because we
have Filippo on the board.
Great.
Now, so those are sort of like the governance updates on like
kind of these core parts of the protocol.
This next section is about hard decentralization, or that's great
and all, but what happens when blue sky kills API access?
Or servers are actually just physical objects that can be destroyed, unplug
ged, or seized.
This is kind of the real politic of running a multi-st
akeholder network where you have one big person at the center
of it.
What are the particular threats, and what can they get away with?
So, I want to call out that decentralization isn't just
one thing, and we need to think through what those threats actually
are.
Numbers are important, but I'm somewhat uninterested in like
what percentage of people are on what thing or what.
It's what are the actual threats that come from blue sky
being outsized in this ecosystem.
Let's think through those threats, and think through how blue sky
can address them, and how the network can address them.
So, we're going to do some threat modeling on what blue
sky could do, and then we're going to talk through some
of the solutions.
So, the most common thing that people think of is blue sky
shuts down AppView API access.
People are familiar with this because a lot of social companies in
the past have done it.
This is actually sort of the threat that I'm least concerned
about, because data access is guaranteed by the open hosting PDS
layer.
As long as the hosting layer, the network inherits its openness
from the PDS layer, and as long as the hosting layer
remains locked open, then these other AppView implementations can emerge
as the need arises.
I've somewhat jokingly in the past called this lazy decentral
ization, that it's if you trust that the hosting layer is
open, then you don't need to decentralize the app layer
yet.
But you have to trust that the hosting layer is open, and
we'll talk about that in a second.
Still, the things that we need for this are tools for back
filling the network, and syncing the network, and also App
View implementation code.
So, now to talk about if we screwed up the hosting layer,
this would be blue sky shutting down access to the PDS,
or access to the open data that's hosted by the PD
S.
To note, blue sky, if blue sky were to do this, it
destroys all of the feeds, apps, and labelers running on the
protocol.
So, the pain of destroying the network of open applications needs to
be severe enough that blue sky cannot consider shutting down our PD
S access.
A smaller version of this attack would be blue sky may stop
serving data to particular competitors.
So, if one big competitor emerges in the ecosystem, maybe we keep
sharing data to all of the feeds and labelers out there,
but we cut off access to that one larger competitor.
The things that we need to prevent this are a thriving network
built on open data.
If people are relying on open data, then we're incentivized
to not cut off access to it.
And then, specifically on this cutting off access to particular competitors, all
of the data is signed and rebroadcastable.
That means that you can get it from any source.
You can get it from the blue sky PDS, or you
can get it from another PDS.
So, we need multiple sources to get data from.
The next sort of threat is blue sky stops crawling non-blue
sky PDSs.
So, these are folks that have migrated their account off of the
blue sky PDS, and the blue sky app view stops index
ing non-blue sky PDS data.
Their motivation to do that would be to monopolize hosting.
What we need to prevent this is a critical mass of users
on non-blue sky PDSs, and other applications that do
index non-blue sky PDS data.
And that, I want to call out that critical mass, basically we
need the critical mass, because if blue sky were to stop index
ing this, you needed to screw up people's experience of the
app, and they would get pissed because there's data that they
want to see that they're not seeing in the blue sky
app.
I want to call out that I don't think that we
need like an even distribution of users across hosting infrastructure in the
network in order to achieve this.
You can imagine 5% of the network, even less than that.
If it's an important 5% of the network, that would
be disruptive enough that if you cut off access to them, people
would be upset and leave the blue sky app.
This threat also becomes much less substantial if people can just go
to another app that is indexing both blue sky content, and
content from non-blue sky PDSs.
So having other applications in the network helps prevent this threat.
Another threat is blue sky messing with accounts.
Examples of this are preventing users from migrating between PDS
s, de-platforming users, especially if we don't have Just
Cause, preventing users from using certain apps or competitors.
The things that we need to prevent this are basically account recovery
or export tools.
So backups of repositories if blue sky is refusing to serve
your repository to you.
User held recovery keys in case blue sky is refusing to sign
account migration operations on your behalf.
And then just a place to go.
Non-blue sky PDS is running in the network that you
can migrate to.
And then the final threat is blue sky just losing access to
accounts.
This may be sort of out of ill intentions or this may
be external forces.
So going out of business, you know, a data center blowing up,
legal action, servers getting seized, something like that.
I would expect in most cases blue sky should be able to
help ease this transition.
For instance, like the most likely one of these is probably blue
sky going out of business.
And we should be able to help ease the transition if that
were the case.
Even if we stop providing PDS services, it's very cheap
for us to keep some PDS's online and rotation keys
as people move off.
In extreme cases where blue sky is refusing to do that or
unable to do it for some reason, we essentially need what we
got from the last threat, which is backups of repositories and
user held recovery keys.
So pulling out the things that we found that we needed for
each of these, it's basically app view implementation and sync tooling.
Nice.
More users on non-blue sky PDS's, so a more
diverse open data hosting layer.
Consumer key management and recovery tools, putting rotation keys in the hands
of users.
Other data sources and backups for repositories.
And then a thriving ecosystem built on open data.
So I want to walk through each one of these and talk
about what the blue sky team can do, what we are doing,
and then what folks in the ecosystem can do if you're
concerned about these particular threats.
So, first on app view implementation and sync.
Relays are cheap now.
With sync 1.
1, FIG is running a relay for under $5 a
month.
That's awesome.
There's over 10 full network relays running in the network.
We seem to be getting pretty good at doing this one.
So you can get your data from a lot of different sources.
There's lots of new sync tools coming out.
We published tap, hydrant, the entire FIG proto microcos
m universe is helping with sync.
And then black sky is actually running a full network app view,
which is incredible.
So in some sense, I kind of think this one's solved,
although we can always do better on it.
But there's also novel approaches like red dwarf that provide a
blue sky like experience with no app view.
And so there's ways to rethink what this looks like in
the network where maybe, I think it's amazing that black sky
is running a full network app view.
I think that you can probably provide blue sky like experiences for
significantly cheaper if you make certain trade offs in how you construct
this.
The next one, Cuba joked that we should take a shot
every time this graph is showed at the conference.
And I told him I got one more for him.
The next one is more users on non blue sky PDS
s.
This is a graph of weekly users posting from non blue sky
PDSs.
And you can see that the trend line is pretty good.
So in some sense, we just got to keep cooking on this
and doing what we're doing.
What blue sky, what we can do and what we're planning
to do to help with this is putting an account migration UI
in the PDS.
We think that users, especially non technical users, probably just have a
better trust relationship with the blue sky PDS.
Or yeah, with the blue sky PDS and would trust an
account migration UI there a little bit more to get over to
non blue sky PDS hosting.
We want to improve the PDS distribution, especially for mid-sized
deployments, things in the 1,000 to 100,000 user range.
Right now it works pretty well for self-hosters and small
groups of people.
It's a little bit of a pain for mid-sized deploy
ments.
And we also want to make the relay more self-serve,
both for third party relays, so that it's easier for
them to get proactive write notifications whenever PDS is right.
But also for our relay doing dynamic rate limits so that you
guys don't have to DM us whenever you run into that
and you get cut off from the relay.
What you all can do for this to improve this is keep
cooking and also backup and recovery systems.
We talked about backup and recovery systems in the context of sort
of blue sky threatening people's repositories and keys.
But it's also important for migrating off to non blue
sky PDS's because you don't necessarily, you know, you
're taking on an operational risk whenever you do that.
You kind of know blue sky has money and you know how
we operate stuff and you know that we're probably keeping your
data secure.
Whenever you move to another PDS or even self-hosting,
you take on some operational risk and having backup and recovery systems
can give you peace of mind to do that.
The next thing that we call that was other data sources and
backups for repositories.
Phil, Fig, bad example, just announced Hubble, which is funded via a
grant from blue sky.
I'm super stoked about this project.
Hubble's a full network mirror of public repositories.
The relay used to offer this whenever we switched to sync 1.
1.
It no longer mirrors all the public repositories in the network.
And so this provides a full network copy of all of the
data.
It's intended to increase network resilience.
This is a backup of your repository.
If your PDS crashes and burns and you lose your repository,
you can go get it from here.
If blue sky tries to lock you out of it, you can
go get a backup of your repository here.
Or if blue sky shuts down our APIs, then you can go
sync repositories from Hubble.
All of the code will be open source and permissibly
licensed.
Phil's planning on running an instance of this, but anybody can
run an instance of this and provide a full network mirror.
Consumer key management and recovery tools.
I actually think that there's a really great product opportunity here.
And I'm kind of surprised that nobody's done it.
You can take advantage of phone TPMs for storing recovery
keys in a very secure way.
This application could also audit PLC and notify users of any
unexpected operations.
And just to note, I also think that this would partner well
with a backup or recovery service.
Especially whenever we put out permission data.
And then the final thing is just a thriving ecosystem built on
open data.
And this is, I think, the biggest part where you all come
in.
Apps built on the atmosphere, atmospheric websites, feeds, labelers, social media
tools.
Anything that requires that the data be open.
In some sense, all of the previous threats that we talked about
are, they're pretty protocol brained.
And I just don't think a lot of users are going
to care or engage about that.
And I don't think that we're going to get to
like an even distribution of users by focusing on key recovery or
non blue sky PDS's or anything like that.
The most important thing for the resilience of the network is that
users need to understand that they're participating in a multi-st
akeholder network.
That they're participating in the atmosphere.
That they're not participating in blue sky.
And so if we're building things that run on open data
and users fall in love with open social.
And these experiences that you can only build on open data.
That is the most important thing that we can do to keep
blue sky honest.
And to keep the open social web running.
So the best way to ensure the resilience of the network is
to build something that people love so much that they would revolt
if it ever went away.
Sweet.
Thank you.
That's great.
It's awesome.
We should get that done probably by next week, week after next.
So it's great.
Easy.
We're heading into the coffee break and we have a couple
of minutes.
Questions?
So users knowing that they're participating in the atmosphere
and not just blue sky.
How do we do it?
What's the branding?
That's a great question and we should figure that out.
This gentleman just showed you an ASCII presentation.
This presentation came from our designer.
I want to call that out.
No, that's a good question.
I think that that is, I mean I don't have the
answer for you right now.
But that is the core question that we need to figure out
this year.
Is how do we start to build intuition for users about what
the atmosphere is.
What they're participating in.
What an atmosphere count is.
And what this whole open social thing is about.
How is the Swiss Association funded?
Is that like a grant from blue sky?
And how does this thing continue even if one of your scenarios,
blue skies, went away?
That's a good question.
Right now it is funded via a grant from blue sky.
The exact details of that haven't been nailed down just yet.
Although it will probably provide some sort of ongoing funding.
And then the association is going to be working to provide more
sustainable funding options after that.
But ultimately that's going to be the prerogative
of the Swiss Association.
Not blue sky.
Let's go get some coffee.
Thanks Dan.